### SC1015-Team-8

# ABOUT <br>
This is a Mini-Project for SC1015 (Introduction to Data Science and Artificial Intelligence). We focused on the USA for our project, utilising the 2020 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) Survey Data. We also referred to the LLCP 2020 Codebook Report for a detailed description of the dataset.

PROBLEM DEFINITION  <br>
With the prevalence of diabetes, our project's problem definition focuses on utilising machine learning methods to forecast the causal factors contributing to the rise in diabetes. By doing so, we aim to empower health professionals, government entities, and individuals with the knowledge needed to proactively prevent diabetes onset. 

EXPLORATORY DATA ANALYSIS <br>
For exploratory data analysis, we plotted bar charts and calculated various coefficients to determine which variables are to be used in our machine learning models. 
Point-Biserial Correlation was used to measure correlation of numerical variables with DIABETES. 
Rank-Biserial Correlation was used to measure correlation of ordinal variables with DIABETES. 
Phi Coefficient was used to measure the correlation of dichotomous variables with DIABETES.

MACHINE LEARNING MODELS USED <br>
Random forest <br>
Support vector machine (SVM) <br>
Logistic regression. <br>
We also performed Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique (SMOTE) to address the class imbalance problem when using these models. <br>

CONCLUSION <br>
We recommend using random forest. 
In general, this model aggregates the outputs of multiple decision trees to make predictions, making it robust to outliers, suitable for non-linear data, and less prone to overfitting. It also performs efficiently on large datasets and often achieves higher accuracy as opposed to other classification algorithms. 
This can be from the fact that when comparing it to other algorithms like Support Vector Machine(SVM) and Logistic Regression, it is the model with a high score for both accuracy and mean F1 score, indicating the best performing model with a balance between precision and recall out of all three algorithms. <br>

One issue we observed with our random forest model was its relatively high false negative rate of 0.40 and an accuracy of only about 70%. We suspect that this might be attributed to our use of SMOTE (Synthetic Minority Over-sampling Technique) to address the under-represented minority class, which we believe contributed to a low F1 score in our initial random forest model without using SMOTE. <br>

However, while SMOTE is supposed to be used to balance the class distribution, it is not perfect and it may not have been able to properly over-sample the minority class. This may prevent the synthetic samples generated by SMOTE from capturing the full complexity and variability of the minority class, leading to misclassifications, thereby affecting the false negative rate and the accuracy of the model. <br>

WHAT DID WE LEARN FROM THIS PROJECT? <br>
For EDA, we learnt how to calculate the Point-Biserial Correlation, Rank-Biserial Correlation, and Phi Coefficients.
We also learnt how to deal with an imbalanced dataset using SMOTE.
For machine learning, we learnt how to implement random forest, SVM, and logistic regression. <br>

INDIVIDUAL CONTRIBUTIONS <br>

data cleaning - Group <br>
EDA - bar-plotting - Timothy <br>
EDA - rank-biserial correlation, point-biserial correlation, phi coefficient calculations - Ziying <br>
ML - random forest & SMOTE - Angelina <br>
ML - SVM - Ziying <br>
ML - logistic regression - Timothy <br>
Slides, video production, script - Group <br>



REFERENCES <br>
Emre, A. (2022, January 4). BRFSS 2020 survey data. Kaggle. https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/aemreusta/brfss-2020-survey-data <br>
LLCP 2020 codebook report overall version data ... (n.d.). https://www.cdc.gov/brfss/annual_data/2020/pdf/codebook20_llcp-v2-508.pdf <br>
Saeedi, P., Petersohn, I., Salpea, P., Malanda, B., Karuranga, S., Unwin, N., Colagiuri, S., Guariguata, L., Motala, A. A., Ogurtsova, K., Shaw, J. E., Bright, D., Williams, R., & IDF Diabetes Atlas Committee. (n.d.). Global and regional diabetes prevalence estimates for 2019 and projections for 2030 and 2045: Results from the International Diabetes Federation <br> Diabetes Atlas, 9th edition. Diabetes research and clinical practice. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31518657/ <br>

